==================
Uluru / Ayers Rock
==================

:tags: Holiday
:author: Markus Holtermann
:image: australia-daily/day106-cover.jpg
:summary: Uluru is a tens of million old sand stone rock and the the most
   sacred and spiritual important place of the Anangu, the indigenous people
   living in Australia's center.

Uluru is a tens of million old sand stone rock and the the most sacred and
spiritual important place of the Anangu, the indigenous people living in
Australia's center. It is located 25 km east of Kata Tjuta, about 400 km
southwest of Alice Springs and part of the *Uluru - Kata Tjuta National Park*.

In 1985 the land was given back to the Anangu which then leased it back to the
Northern Territory. The park organization was given to a management board
consisting of 4 male Anangu, 4 female Anangu as well as 4 people from the
Northern Territory government. The board takes care of all decisions relevant
to the park's development and future.


The Climb
=========

While the Anangu discourage you to climb Uluru it is accepted by law and part
of the lease agreement. However, I've the ratio of people climbing Uluru goes
below 25% of all visitors (current ratio is at about 32%) the board is allowed
to disallow what people call *the climb* once and for all. Furthermore, a
current referendum ending in 2019 discusses the topic and may result in a
closure as well.

The climb starts with a 300 m steep ascent with only a handrail. While I didn't
climb up a friend of mine did. The next photos have been taken by him (all
rights reserved).

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 2

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-01.jpg
      :alt: Handrail for the climb of Uluru

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-02.jpg
      :alt: View from Uluru



The Boardwalk
=============

Instead of climbing I did half the board work right during sunrise. I started
at the eastern part and made my way to the west side via over the southern
hillside.

When you look at Uluru from a scientific perspective you see lots of caves.
They are a result of erosions caused by rain and wind. If you consider the
Anangu culture they were caused from spear impacts and other weird sounding
reasons.

I timed my boardwalk such that I was at the *Mala Walk* by 8am to join a free
ranger guided walk. While I experienced a few free walks that weren't worth the
time, this 1.5 hour walk totally was worth it. The ranger -- indigenous though
not an Anangu -- told the cultural story behind Uluru and explained its
importance to the Anangu. Given this additional knowledge the above mentioned
reasons don't sound too off anymore.

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 2

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-03.jpg
      :alt: Uluru Boardwalk

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-04.jpg
      :alt: Uluru Boardwalk

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-05.jpg
      :alt: Uluru Boardwalk: Kangaroos on Uluru

   .. image:: australia-daily/day106-06.jpg
      :alt: Uluru Boardwalk: Erosions
