==============================================
The conference island -- DjangoCon Europe 2014
==============================================

:tags: Community, Django, DjangoCon
:author: Markus Holtermann
:status: draft

It has been a while since I had the time to write another blog post. As you
might have noticed, I'm an organizer of 2014's EuroPython in Berlin. My job as
the web team leader requires some responsibility I'm eager to fulfill,
especially for a conference where we expect up to 1.200 attendees. Furthermore,
this job is a sideline to my regular job, being a computer science student.

Last week, however, I took the time to attend the DjangoCon Europe. After an
incredible *circus edition* 2013 in Warsaw, this year's organizers stepped up
to the plate to host another amazing conference. While everybody knew DjangoCon
Europe 2014 was going to be in France from the beginning, it took some months
until the announcement was made that the event would happen somewhere on the
Côte d'Azur. The community, though, was kept in the dark about the exact
location for a few more months. Eventually the *Île des Embiez*, a small island
between Toulon and Marseille, was announce, and *djangoisland* born.


Getting there
=============

Getting to this little island on Monday before official conference start was
kind of a challenge for me. Although I'm living in Berlin, there are not many
(fast) ways to get to a bigger city in southern France. I took a flight via
Brussels in the early morning at about 7am and arrived in Marseille at about
12pm plus some waiting time at baggage claim. That's actually not that bad. But
getting from Marseille to this little island in the middle of nowhere was hard:

From the Marseille Provence Airport (MRS) to Marseille Saint-Charles train
station by bus. Unfortunately the shuttle bus we could have taken if the plane
hasn't been delayed was already gone.

From Saint-Charles we took a one hour train ride to Toulon train station. Sadly
we missed the connection bus there which would have taken us to the harbor in
La Brusc. But having about 2 hours free time in Toulon wasn't that bad. We
walked through the city to the harbor and grabbed some lunch.

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 3

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-01tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-01.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-02tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-02.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-03tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-03.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-04tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-04.jpg
      :class: span100

Back at the central bus station, we met quite a lot other DjangoCon attendees
travelling with us to the port in La Brusc where the ferry brought us to the
island.

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 3

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-05tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-05.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-06tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-06.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-07tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-07.jpg

At about 6pm we arrived at the hotel. After I checked into my room I had an
amazing view from the balkony.

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 3

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-08tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-08.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-09tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-09.jpg
      :class: span66

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-10tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-10.jpg
      :class: span100


The Island
==========

    [The Île des Embiez] has a surface area of 0.9 square kilometres (0.35 sq
    mi), with a coastline of 6 kilometres (3.7 mi). The island is 57 metres
    (187 ft) high at its highest point. [WIKI]_

The sunny and warm weather animated me and many others to explore the island.
Here are some photos that capture some nice views.

.. gallery::
   :small: 1
   :medium: 3

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-11tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-11.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-12tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-12.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-13tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-13.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-14tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-14.jpg
      :class: span100

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-15tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-15.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-16tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-16.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-17tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-17.jpg
      :class: noclear

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-18tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-18.jpg
      :class: span100

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-19tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-19.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-20tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-20.jpg
      :class: noclear

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-21tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-21.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-22tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-22.jpg
      :class: span100

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-23tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-23.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-24tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-24.jpg

   .. image:: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-25tb.jpg
      :alt: 
      :target: /images/djangoconeu2014/DCE14-25.jpg


License
=======

.. figure:: /images/cc-by-sa-3.0-88x31.png
   :align: right
   :alt: Creative Commons License
   :target: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/

   The photos in this blog post are licensed under a `Creative Commons
   Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.`_.


.. _Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.:
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/

.. [Wiki] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embiez
